#summary One-sentence summary of this page.

= Introduction =

Add your content here.


= Details =

Download

You can download the latest version HERE. 

Windows users: If Pd complains about mp3 and/or ogg support, download this file and copy the files inside to your C:/Windows/System32 folder. 

If you want to be informed of new versions, please send me your contact. 
How to install and run the Click Tracker patch
1 - Install Pure Data Extended

The software runs with Pure Data-Extended (Pd for short), which you must install first. Pure Data is a free software for live electronics. Installing it on your computer should be an easy process, just do the following: 
go to the downloads section on the Pd website (left corner) 
download the release of Pd-Extended that fits your system ("pd-extended" section) 
install the program and start it, the window “Pd-extended” will appear 
go to the menu Media -> "Test Audio and MIDI" 
in the new window, on the left side under "TEST TONES", try clicking on the values “80” or “60” (volume values in decibels). You should hear a sine tone at 440 Hz (A). 
if this happened, everything is ok. If not, maybe you need to setup your audio (Media -> Audio settings), or there is another problem. 

If you have difficulties getting Pd to work, feel free to contact me — I'll try to help as much as I can. 
2 - Open and Run the Click Tracker Patch

Once you have Pd installed and running, you can open the zip file with the patch: 
unpack the file to a new folder 
within Pd open up the file named click-tracker.pd 
there you have the Click tracker. Click "Open score" (or press the key "o") to open a score 
open up the file examples/score-tutorial.txt that is in the folder of the patch 
click Play (or press space) to start hearing the score. 
 And that's it. If you click on the Instructions button you'll find a short explanation of the patch. But to get more detailed informations, and to know how to start a new score, you should open score-tutorial.txt with a text editor. This file isn't only a score, but also a full tutorial explaining how the program works. 


Alternatively, look up the same tutorial online. 

After you went through it, you can also see other score examples that I put in the same folder: excerpts by Stravinsky, Boulez and Nunes.